 
Chapter 1 
A Tour of the World 
15
countries, widespread corruption and poor property rights make firms unwilling to in-
vest. So why has China fared so much better? Some economists believe that this is the 
result of a slower transition: The first Chinese reforms took place in agriculture as early 
as 1980, and even today, many firms remain owned by the state. Others argue that the 
fact that the communist party has remained in control has actually helped the economic 
transition; tight political control has allowed for a better protection of property rights, at 
least for new firms, giving them incentives to invest. Getting the answers to these ques-
tions, and thus learning what other poor countries can take from the Chinese experi-
ence, can clearly make a huge difference, not only for China but for the rest of the world.
1-5 Looking Ahead
This concludes our world tour. There are many other regions of the world we could 
have looked at:
■ 
India, another poor and large country, with a population of 1,200 million people, 
which, like China, is now growing very fast. In 2010, India’s output growth rate 
was 10%.
■ 
Japan, whose growth performance for the 40 years following World War II was so 
impressive that it was referred to as an economic miracle, but has done very poorly 
in the last two decades. Since a stock market crash in the early 1990s, Japan has 
been in a prolonged slump, with average output growth under 1% per year.
■ 
Latin America, which went from very high inflation to low inflation in the 1990s. 
Many countries, such as Chile and Brazil, appear to be in good economic shape 
and have done relatively well in the crisis. Argentina, which went through a col-
lapse of its exchange rate and a major banking crisis in the early 2000s, has now 
largely recovered and is also growing rapidly.
■ 
Central and Eastern Europe, which shifted from central planning to a market sys-
tem in the early 1990s. In most countries, the shift was characterized by a sharp 
decline in output at the start of transition. Some countries, such as Poland, now 
have high growth rates; others, such as Bulgaria or Romania, are still struggling.
■ 
Africa, which has suffered decades of economic stagnation, but where, contrary to 
common perceptions, growth has been high since 2000, averaging 5.5% per year 
during the decade and reflecting growth in most of the countries of the continent.
There is a limit to how much you can absorb in this first chapter. Think about the 
questions to which you have been exposed:
■ 
The big issues triggered by the crisis: What caused the crisis? Why did it transmit 
so fast from the United States to the rest of the world? In retrospect, what could 
and should have been done to prevent it? Were the monetary and fiscal responses 
appropriate? Why is the recovery so slow in advanced countries? How was China 
able to maintain high growth?
■ 
Can monetary and fiscal policies be used to avoid recessions? At what rate should 
the United States reduce its budget deficit? What are the pros and cons of joining 
a common currency area such as the euro area? What measures could be taken in 
Europe to reduce persistently high unemployment?
■ 
Why do growth rates differ so much across countries, even over long periods of 
time? Can other countries emulate China and grow at the same rate?
The purpose of this book is to give you a way of thinking about these questions. 
As we develop the tools you need, we shall show you how to use them by returning to 
these questions and showing you the answers the tools suggest.
