12 
Introduction 
The Core
Most economists believe, however, that the source of the problem is not macroeco-
nomic policy, but labor market institutions. Too tight a monetary policy, they concede, 
can indeed lead to high unemployment for some time, but surely not for 20 years. The 
fact that unemployment has been so high for so long points to problems in the labor 
market. The challenge is then to identify exactly what these problems are.
Some economists believe the main problem is that European states protect workers 
too much. To prevent workers from losing their jobs, they make it expensive for firms to lay 
off workers. One of the unintended results of this policy is to deter firms from hiring work-
ers in the first place, and this increases unemployment. To protect workers who  become 
unemployed, European governments provide generous unemployment insurance. But, 
by doing so, they decrease the incentives for the unemployed to look for jobs; this also 
 increases unemployment. The solution, they argue, is to be less protective, to eliminate 
these labor market rigidities, and to adopt U.S.-style labor-market institutions. This is what 
the United Kingdom has largely done, and, until the crisis, its unemployment rate was low.
Others are more skeptical. They point to the fact that, before the crisis, unemploy-
ment was not high everywhere in Europe. It was low in a number of smaller countries—for 
example, the Netherlands or Denmark, where the unemployment rate was under 4%. Yet 
these countries are very different from the United States and provide generous social in-
surance to workers. This suggests that the problem may lie not so much with the degree of 
protection but with the way it is implemented. The challenge, these economists argue, is to 
understand what the Netherlands or Denmark have done right. Resolving these questions 
is one of the major tasks facing European macroeconomists and policy makers today.
What Has the Euro Done for Its Members?
Supporters of the euro point first to its enormous symbolic importance. In light of the 
many past wars among European countries, what better proof of the permanent end to 
military conflict than the adoption of a common currency? They also point to the eco-
nomic advantages of having a common currency: no more changes in the relative price 
of currencies for European firms to worry about, no more need to change currencies 
when crossing borders. Together with the removal of other obstacles to trade among 
European countries, the euro contributes, they argue, to the creation of a large eco-
nomic power in the world. There is little question that the move to the euro was indeed 
one of the main economic events of the start of the twenty-first century.
Others worry, however, that the symbolism of the euro may come with substantial 
economic costs. They point out that a common currency means a common monetary 
policy, which means the same interest rate across the euro countries. What if, they ar-
gue, one country plunges into recession while another is in the middle of an economic 
boom? The first country needs lower interest rates to increase spending and output; 
the second country needs higher interest rates to slow down its economy. If interest 
rates have to be the same in both countries, what will happen? Isn’t there the risk that 
one country will remain in recession for a long time or that the other will not be able to 
slow down its booming economy?
Until recently, the debate was somewhat abstract. It no longer is. A number of euro 
members, from Ireland, to Portugal, to Greece, are going through deep recessions. If 
they had their own currency, they likely would have decreased their interest rate or de-
preciated their currency vis à vis other euro members to increase the demand for their 
exports. Because they share a currency with their neighbors, this is not possible. Thus, 
some economists argue that they should drop out of the euro. Others argue that such 
an exit would be both unwise, as it would give up on the other advantages of being in 
the euro, and extremely disruptive, leading to even deeper problems for the country 
that has exited. This issue is likely to remain a hot one for some time to come.
