 
Chapter 1 
A Tour of the World 
17
APPENDIX: Where to Find the Numbers
Suppose you want to find the numbers for inflation in Ger-
many over the past five years. Fifty years ago, the answer would 
have been to learn German, find a library with German pub-
lications, find the page where inflation numbers were given, 
write them down, and plot them by hand on a clean sheet of 
paper. Today, improvements in the collection of data, the de-
velopment of computers and electronic databases, and access 
to the Internet make the task much easier. This appendix will 
help you find the numbers you are looking for, be it inflation in 
Malaysia last year, or consumption in the United States in 1959, 
or unemployment in Ireland in the 1980s. In most cases, the 
data can be downloaded to spreadsheets for further treatment.
For a Quick Look at Current Numbers
■ The best source for the most recent numbers on output, 
unemployment, inflation, exchange rates, interest rates, 
and stock prices for a large number of countries is the last 
four pages of The Economist, published each week (www.
economist.com). The Web site, like many of the Web sites 
listed below, contains both information available free to 
anyone and information available only to subscribers. 
■ A good source for recent numbers about the U.S. economy 
is National Economic Trends, published monthly by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis (www.research.stlou-
isfed.org/publications/net/).
For More Detail about the U.S. Economy
■ A convenient database, with numbers often going back to 
the 1960s, for both the United States and other countries, 
is the Federal Reserve Economic Database (called FRED), 
maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis. Ac-
cess is free, and much of the data used in this book comes 
from that database. (www.research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/)
■ Once a year, the Economic Report of the President, written 
by the Council of Economic Advisers and published by the 
U.S. Government Printing Office in Washington, D.C., gives 
a description of current evolutions, as well as numbers for 
most major macroeconomic variables, often going back to 
the 1950s. (It contains two parts, a report on the economy, 
and a set of statistical tables. Both can be found at www.ori-
gin.www.gpoaccess.gov/eop/.)
■ A detailed presentation of the most recent numbers for 
national income accounts is given in the Survey of Current 
Business, published monthly by the U.S. Department of 
Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis (www.bea.gov). 
A user’s guide to the statistics published by the Bureau of 
Economic Analysis is given in the Survey of Current Busi-
ness, April 1996.
■ The standard reference for national income accounts is 
the National Income and Product Accounts of the United 
States. Volume 1, 1929–1958, and Volume 2, 1959–1994, are 
published by the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of 
Economic Analysis (www.bea.gov).
■ For data on just about everything, including economic 
data, a precious source is the Statistical Abstract of the 
United States, published annually by the U.S. Department 
of Commerce, Bureau of the Census (www.census.gov/
prod/www/statistical-abstract.html).
Numbers for Other Countries
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and De-
velopment, OECD for short, located in Paris, France (www.
oecd.org), is an organization that includes most of the rich 
countries in the world (Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, 
Chile, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, 
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, 
data series on the unemployment rate for the period 1969 to 
the end of the data. Make sure all data series are seasonally 
adjusted.
 a. Look at each recession since 1969. What was the unem-
ployment rate in the first month of the first quarter of 
negative growth? What was the unemployment rate in the 
last month of the last quarter of negative growth? By how 
much did the unemployment rate increase?
 b. Which recession had the largest increase in the rate of un-
employment?  Begin with the month before the quarter in 
which output first falls and measure to the highest level of 
the unemployment rate before the next recession.
Further Reading
■ The best way to follow current economic events and issues 
is to read The Economist, a weekly magazine published in 
England. The articles in The Economist are well informed, well 
written, witty, and opinionated. Make sure to read it regularly. 
