 
Chapter 2 
A Tour of the Book 
29
2-3 The Inflation Rate
Inflation is a sustained rise in the general level of prices—the price level. The infla-
tion rate is the rate at which the price level increases. (Symmetrically,  deflation is 
a sustained decline in the price level. It corresponds to a negative  inflation rate).
The practical issue is how to define the price level so the inflation rate can be 
measured. Macroeconomists typically look at two measures of the price level, at two 
price indexes: the GDP deflator and the Consumer Price Index.
The GDP Deflator
We saw earlier how increases in nominal GDP can come either from an increase in real 
GDP, or from an increase in prices. Put another way, if we see nominal GDP increase 
faster than real GDP, the difference must come from an increase in prices.
This remark motivates the definition of the GDP deflator. The GDP deflator in year 
t, Pt, is defined as the ratio of nominal GDP to real GDP in year t:
Pt = Nominal GDPt
Real GDPt
= $Yt
Yt
Note that, in the year in which, by construction, real GDP is equal to nominal GDP 
(2005 at this point in the United States), this definition implies that the price level is 
equal to 1. This is worth emphasizing: The GDP deflator is called an index number. Its 
level is chosen arbitrarily—here it is equal to 1 in 2005—and has no economic interpre-
tation. But its rate of change, 1Pt - Pt-12 >Pt-1 (which we shall denote by pt in the rest 
of the book), has a clear economic interpretation: It gives the rate at which the general 
level of prices increases over time—the rate of inflation.
One advantage to defining the price level as the GDP deflator is that it implies a 
simple relation among nominal GDP, real GDP, and the GDP deflator. To see this, reor-
ganize the previous equation to get:
$Yt = Pt Yt
Nominal GDP is equal to the GDP deflator times real GDP. Or, putting it in terms of 
rates of change: The rate of growth of nominal GDP is equal to the rate of inflation plus 
the rate of growth of real GDP.
The Consumer Price Index
The GDP deflator gives the average price of output—the final goods produced in the 
economy. But consumers care about the average price of consumption—the goods 
they consume. The two prices need not be the same: The set of goods produced in the 
economy is not the same as the set of goods purchased by consumers, for two reasons:
■ 
Some of the goods in GDP are sold not to consumers but to firms (machine tools, 
for example), to the government, or to foreigners.
■ 
Some of the goods bought by consumers are not produced domestically but are 
imported from abroad.
To measure the average price of consumption, or, equivalently, the cost of  living, 
macroeconomists look at another index, the Consumer Price Index, or CPI. The CPI has 
been in existence in the United States since 1917 and is published monthly (in contrast, 
numbers for GDP and the GDP deflator are only constructed and published quarterly).
The CPI gives the cost in dollars of a specific list of goods and services over 
time. The list, which is based on a detailed study of consumer spending, attempts to 
Index numbers are often set 
equal to 100 (in the base year) 
rather than to 1. If you look at 
the Economic Report of the 
President (see Chapter 1) you 
will see that the GDP deflator, 
reported in Table B-3, is equal 
to 100 for 2005 (the base year), 
103.2 in 2006, and so on.
 
Compute the GDP deflator and 
the associated rate of inflation 
from 2004 to 2005 and from 
2005 to 2006 in our car exam-
ple in Section 2-1, when real 
GDP is constructed using the 
2005 price of cars as the com-
mon price.

For a refresher, see Appendix 2, 
Proposition 7.
 
Do not confuse the CPI with the 
PPI, or producer price index, 
which is an index of prices of 
domestically produced goods 
in manufacturing, mining, ag-
riculture, fishing, forestry, and 
electric utility industries.
 
Deflation is rare, but it hap-
pens. Japan has had defla-
tion, off and on, since the 
late 1990s. The United States 
experienced deflation in 
the 1930s during the Great 
Depression.
 
