14 
Introduction 
The Core
represents a doubling of output every seven years. Compare this number to the num-
bers for the United States and for Europe we saw earlier, and you understand why the 
importance of the emerging economies in the world economy, China being the main 
one, is increasing so rapidly. Turn to unemployment. Numbers for unemployment are 
typically less reliable in poorer countries, so you should take those numbers with a 
grain of salt: Many workers stay in the countryside rather than being unemployed in 
the cities. Nevertheless, the numbers suggest consistently low unemployment. And in-
flation, which was high before 2000, is now relatively low.
Another striking aspect of Table 1-4 is how difficult it is to see the effects of the cri-
sis in the data. Growth has barely decreased, and unemployment has barely increased 
since 2007. The reason is not that China is closed to the rest of the world. Chinese exports 
slowed during the crisis. But the adverse effect on demand was nearly fully offset by a 
major fiscal expansion by the Chinese government, with, in particular, a major increase 
in public investment. The result was sustained growth of demand and, in turn, of output.
This sustained growth performance raises obvious questions. The first is whether 
the numbers are for real. Could it be that growth has been overstated? After all, China 
is still officially a communist country, and government officials may have incentives to 
overstate the economic performance of their sector or their province. Economists who 
have looked at this carefully conclude that this is probably not the case. The statistics 
are not as reliable as they are in richer countries, but there is no obvious bias. Output 
growth is indeed very high in China.
So where does the growth come from? It clearly comes from two sources:
■ 
The first is high accumulation of capital. The investment rate (the ratio of invest-
ment to output) in China exceeds 40% of output, a high number. For comparison, 
the investment rate in the United States is only 17%. More capital means higher 
productivity and higher output.
■ 
The second is rapid technological progress. One of the strategies followed by the 
Chinese government has been to encourage foreign firms to relocate and produce 
in China. As foreign firms are typically much more productive than Chinese firms, 
this has increased productivity and output. Another aspect of the strategy has been 
to encourage joint ventures between foreign and Chinese firms. By making Chi-
nese firms work with and learn from foreign firms, the productivity of the Chinese 
firms has increased dramatically.
When described in this way, achieving high productivity and high output growth 
appears easy, a recipe that every poor country could and should follow. In fact, things 
are less obvious. China is one of a number of countries that made the transition from 
central planning to a market economy. Most of the other countries, from Central Europe 
to Russia and the other former Soviet republics, experienced a large decrease in output 
at the time of transition. Most still have growth rates far below that of China. In many 
Table 1-4 Growth and Inflation in China, 1980–2012
Percent
1980–1999 
(average)
2000–2007 
(average)
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Output growth rate
9.8
10.5
9.6
9.2
10.3
9.5
9.0
Unemployment rate
2.7
3.9
4.2
4.3
4.1
4.0
4.0
Inflation rate
8.1
1.6
5.9
−0.6
3.3
5.5
3.3
Output growth rate: annual rate of growth of output (GDP). Inflation rate: annual rate of change of the price level (GDP 
deflator).
Source: World Economic Outlook database, September 2011
