34 
Introduction 
The Core
■ 
The previous argument can be taken one step further: Neither technology, nor cap-
ital, nor skills are given. The technological sophistication of a country  depends on 
its ability to innovate and introduce new technologies. The size of its capital stock 
depends on how much people save. The skills of workers depend on the quality 
of the country’s education system. Other factors are also important: If firms are 
to operate efficiently, for example, they need a clear system of laws under which 
to operate and an honest government to enforce those laws. This suggests a third 
answer: The true determinants of output are factors like a country’s education sys-
tem, its saving rate, and the quality of its government. If we want to understand 
what determines the level of output, we must look at these factors.
You might be wondering at this point, which of the three answers is right? The fact 
is that all three are right. But each applies over a different time frame:
■ 
In the short run, say, a few years, the first answer is the right one. Year-to-year 
movements in output are primarily driven by movements in demand. Changes 
in demand, perhaps due to changes in consumer confidence or other factors, can 
lead to a decrease in output (a recession) or an increase in output (an expansion).
■ 
In the medium run, say, a decade, the second answer is the right one. Over the me-
dium run, the economy tends to return to the level of output determined by supply 
factors: the capital stock, the level of technology, and the size of the labor force. And, 
over a decade or so, these factors move sufficiently slowly that we can take them as 
given.
■ 
In the long run, say, a few decades or more, the third answer is the right one. To 
understand why China has been able to achieve such a high growth rate since 
1980, we must understand why both the capital stock and the level of technology 
in China are increasing so fast. To do so, we must look at factors like the education 
system, the saving rate, and the role of the government.
This way of thinking about the determinants of output underlies macroeconomics, 
and it underlies the organization of this book.
2-6 A Tour of the Book
The book is organized in three parts: A core; two extensions; and, finally, a comprehen-
sive look at the role of macroeconomic policy. This organization is shown in Figure 2-7. 
We now describe it in more detail.
The Core
The core is composed of three parts—the short run, the medium run, and the long run.
■ 
Chapters 3 to 5 look at how output is determined in the short run. To focus on 
the role of demand, we assume that firms are willing to supply any quantity at a 
given price. In other words, we ignore supply constraints. Chapter 3 looks at the 
goods market. Chapter 4 focuses on financial markets. Chapter 5 puts the goods 
and financial markets together. The resulting framework is known as the IS–LM 
model. Developed in the late 1930s, the IS–LM model still provides a simple way 
of thinking about the determination of output in the short run, and it remains a 
 basic building block of macroeconomics. It also allows for a first pass at studying 
the  effects of fiscal policy and monetary policy on output.
