26 
Introduction 
The Core
The unemployment rate is the ratio of the number of people who are unemployed 
to the number of people in the labor force:
 u = U
L
 unemployment rate = unemployment>labor force
Constructing the unemployment rate is less obvious than you might have thought. 
The cartoon above not withstanding, determining whether somebody is employed 
is straightforward. Determining whether somebody is unemployed is harder.  Recall 
from the definition that, to be classified as unemployed, a person must meet two 
 conditions: that he or she does not have a job, and he or she is looking for one; this 
second condition is harder to assess.
Until the 1940s in the United States, and until more recently in most other 
countries, the only available source of data on unemployment was the number of 
people registered at unemployment offices, and so only those workers who were 
registered in unemployment offices were counted as unemployed. This system 
led to a poor measure of unemployment. How many of those looking for jobs ac-
tually registered at the unemployment office varied both across countries and 
across time. Those who had no incentive to register—for example, those who had 
 exhausted their unemployment benefits—were unlikely to take the time to come to 
the unemployment office, so they were not counted. Countries with less generous 
benefit systems were likely to have fewer unemployed registering, and therefore 
smaller measured unemployment rates.
Today, most rich countries rely on large surveys of households to compute the 
unemployment rate. In the United States, this survey is called the Current Population 
Survey (CPS). It relies on interviews of 50,000 households every month. The survey 
classifies a person as employed if he or she has a job at the time of the interview; it clas-
sifies a person as unemployed if he or she does not have a job and has been looking for 
a job in the last four weeks. Most other countries use a similar definition of unemploy-
ment. In the United States, estimates based on the CPS show that, during 2010, an aver-
age of 139.0 million people were employed, and 14.8 million people were unemployed, 
so the unemployment rate was 14.8>1139.0 + 14.82 = 9.6%.
Note that only those looking  for a job are counted as unemployed; those who do 
not have a job and are not looking for one are counted as not in the labor force. When 
unemployment is high, some of the unemployed give up looking for a job and therefore 
are no longer counted as unemployed. These people are known as discouraged workers. 
Take an extreme example: If all workers without a job gave up looking for one, the 
Non Sequitur © 2006 Wiley Ink, Inc. Distributed by 
Universal Uclick. Reprinted with permission. All rights 
reserved.
