32 
Introduction 
The Core
Change in the unemployment rate
(percentage points)
Output growth (percent)
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
Figure 2-5
Changes in the 
unemployment rate versus 
output growth in the 
United States, 1960–2010
Output growth that is higher 
than usual is associated with 
a reduction in the unemploy-
ment rate; output growth that 
is lower than usual is associ-
ated with an increase in the 
unemployment rate.
Source: See Figures 2-2 and 2-3.
growth leads to a decrease in unemployment. The slope of the line is -0.4. This 
implies that, on average, an increase in the growth rate of 1% decreases the unem-
ployment rate by roughly -0.4%. This is why unemployment goes up in recessions 
and down in expansions. This relation has a simple but important implication: The 
key to decreasing unemployment is a high enough rate of growth.
■ 
This vertical line crosses the horizontal axis at the point where output growth is 
roughly equal to 3%. In economic terms: It takes a growth rate of about 3% to keep 
unemployment constant. This is for two reasons. The first is that population, and 
thus the labor force, increases over time, so employment must grow over time just to 
keep the unemployment rate constant. The second is that output per worker is also 
increasing with time, which implies that output growth is higher than employment 
growth. Suppose, for example, that the labor force grows at 1% and that output per 
worker grows at 2%. Then output growth must be equal to 3% 11% + 2%2 just to 
keep the unemployment rate constant.
The Phillips Curve
Okun’s law implies that, with strong enough growth, one can decrease the unemploy-
ment rate to very low levels. But intuition suggests that, when unemployment becomes 
very low, the economy is likely to overheat, and that this will lead to upward pressure 
on inflation. And, to a large extent, this is true. This relation was first explored in 1958 
by a New Zealand economist, A. W. Phillips, and has become known as the Phillips 
curve. Phillips plotted the rate of inflation against the unemployment rate. Since then, 
the Phillips curve has been redefined as a relation between the change in the rate of 
inflation and the unemployment rate. Figure 2-6 plots the change in the inflation rate 
(measured using the CPI) on the vertical axis against the unemployment rate on the 
horizontal axis, together with the line that fits the cloud of points best, for the United 
States since 1960. Looking at the figure again suggests two conclusions:
■ 
The line is downward sloping, although the fit is not as tight as it was for Okun’s 
law: Higher unemployment leads, on average, to a decrease in inflation; lower 
unemployment leads to an increase in inflation. But this is only true on average. 
Sometimes, high unemployment is associated with an increase in inflation.
It should probably be known 
as the Phillips relation, but it is 
too late to change that.
 
Such a graph, plotting one 
variable against another, is 
called a scatterplot. The line 
is called a regression line. For 
more on regressions, see Ap-
pendix 3.
 
