 c. Using the prices for 2006 as the set of common prices, 
what is real GDP in 2005 and in 2006? By what percentage 
does real GDP change from 2005 to 2006?
 d. Why are the two output growth rates constructed in (b) and 
(c) different? Which one is correct? Explain your answer.
5. Consider the economy described in Problem 4.
 a. Use the prices for 2005 as the set of common prices to 
compute real GDP in 2005 and in 2006. Compute the GDP 
deflator for 2005 and for 2006 and compute the rate of in-
flation from 2005 to 2006.
 b. Use the prices for 2006 as the set of common prices to 
compute real GDP in 2005 and in 2006. Compute the GDP 
deflator for 2005 and for 2006 and compute the rate of in-
flation from 2005 to 2006.
 c. Why are the two rates of inflation different? Which one is 
correct? Explain your answer.
6. Consider the economy described in Problem 4.
 a.  Construct real GDP for years 2005 and 2006 by using the 
average price of each good over the two years.
 b. By what percentage does real GDP change from 2005 to 2006?
 c. What is the GDP deflator in 2005 and 2006? Using the GDP 
deflator, what is the rate of inflation from 2005 to 2006?
 d. Is this an attractive solution to the problems pointed out in 
Problems 4 and 5 (i.e., two different growth rates and two 
different inflation rates, depending on which set of prices 
is used)? (The answer is yes and is the basis for the con-
struction of chained-type deflators. See the appendix to 
this chapter for more discussion.)
7. Using macroeconomic relations:
 a. Okun’s law stated that when output growth is higher than 
usual, the unemployment rate tends to fall.  Explain why 
usual output growth is positive.
 b. In which year, a year where output growth is 2% or a year 
where output growth is –2%, will the unemployment rate rise 
more?
 c. The Phillips curve is a relation between the change in the 
inflation rate and the level of the unemployment rate. 
Using the Phillips curve, is the unemployment rate zero 
when the rate of inflation is neither rising nor falling.
 d. The Phillips curve is often portrayed a line with a negative 
slope. In the text, the slope is –0.4.  In your opinion, is this 
a “better” economy if the line has a large slope, say –0.8, or 
a smaller slope, say –0.2? 
DIG DEEPER
All Dig Deeper questions and problems are available 
on MyEconLab.
8. Hedonic pricing
As the first Focus box in this chapter explains, it is difficult to 
measure the true increase in prices of goods whose characteristics 
change over time. For such goods, part of any price increase can 
be attributed to an increase in quality. Hedonic pricing offers a 
method to compute the quality-adjusted increase in prices.
 a. Consider the case of a routine medical checkup. Name 
some reasons you might want to use hedonic pricing to 
measure the change in the price of this service.
Now consider the case of a medical checkup for a pregnant 
woman. Suppose that a new ultrasound method is introduced. 
In the first year that this method is available, half of doctors 
 offer the new method, and half offer the old method. A checkup 
using the new method costs 10% more than a checkup using the 
old method.
 b. In percentage terms, how much of a quality increase does 
the new method represent over the old method? (Hint: 
Consider the fact that some women choose to see a doctor 
offering the new method when they could have chosen to 
see a doctor offering the old method.)
Now, in addition, suppose that in the first year the new ultra-
sound method is available, the price of checkups using the new 
method is 15% higher than the price of checkups in the previous 
year (when everyone used the old method).
 c. How much of the higher price for checkups using the new 
method (as compared to checkups in the previous year) re-
flects a true price increase of checkups and how much repre-
sents a quality increase? In other words, how much higher is 
the quality-adjusted price of checkups using the new method 
as compared to the price of checkups in the previous year?
In many cases, the kind of information we used in parts (b) and 
(c) is not available. For example, suppose that in the year the 
new ultrasound method is introduced, all doctors adopt the 
new method, so the old method is no longer used. In addition, 
continue to assume that the price of checkups in the year the 
new method is introduced is 15% higher than the price of check-
ups in the previous year (when everyone used the old method). 
Thus, we observe a 15% price increase in checkups, but we real-
ize that the quality of checkups has increased.
 d. Under these assumptions, what information required to 
compute the quality-adjusted price increase of checkups 
is lacking? Even without this information, can we say any-
thing about the quality-adjusted price increase of check-
ups? Is it more than 15%? less than 15%? Explain.
9. Measured and true GDP
Suppose that instead of cooking dinner for an hour, you de-
cide to work an extra hour, earning an additional $12. You then 
purchase some (takeout) Chinese food, which costs you $10.
 a. By how much does measured GDP increase?
 b. Do you think the increase in measured GDP accurately re-
flects the effect on output of your decision to work? Explain.
EXPLORE FURTHER
10. Comparing the recessions of 2009 and 2001: 
One very easy source for data is the Federal Reserve Bank 
of St. Louis FRED database. The series that measures real GDP 
is GDPC1, real GDP in each quarter of the year expressed 
at a seasonally adjusted annual rate (denoted SAAR).  The 
monthly series for the unemployment rate is UNRATE.  You 
can download these series in a variety of ways from this 
database.
 a. Look at the data on quarterly real GDP growth from 1999 
through 2001 and then from 2007 through 2009.  Which 
recession has larger negative values for GDP growth, the 
recession centered on 2000 or the recession centered on 
2008? 
38 
Introduction 
The Core
