6

Figure 2-6

Change in inflation rate (percentage points)

Changes in the 
inflation rate versus the 
unemployment rate in the 
United States, 1960–2010

4

2

A low unemployment rate 
leads to an increase in the in-
flation rate, a high unemploy-
ment rate to a decrease in the 
inflation rate.

0

–2

Source: See Figures 2-3 and 2-4.

–4

–6

3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Unemployment (percent)

■ 
The line crosses the horizontal axis at the point where the unemployment rate is 
roughly equal to 6%. In economic terms: When unemployment has been below 6%, 
inflation has typically increased, suggesting that the economy was overheating, oper-
ating above its potential. When unemployment has been above 6%, inflation has typi-
cally decreased, suggesting that the economy was operating below potential. But, again 
here, the relation is not tight enough that the unemployment rate at which the econ-
omy  overheats can be pinned down very precisely. This explains why some economists 
 believe that we should try to maintain a lower unemployment rate, say 4 or 5%, and oth-
ers believe that it may be dangerous, leading to overheating and increasing inflation.

Clearly, a successful economy is an economy that combines high output growth, low 
unemployment, and low inflation. Can all these objectives be achieved simultane-
ously? Is low unemployment compatible with low and stable inflation? Do policy mak-
ers have the tools to sustain growth, to achieve low unemployment while maintaining 
low inflation? These are the questions we shall take up as we go through the book. The 
next two sections give you the road map.

2-5 The Short Run, the Medium Run, 
the Long Run

What determines the level of aggregate output in an economy?

■ 
Reading newspapers suggests a first answer: Movements in output come from move-
ments in the demand for goods. You probably have read news stories that  begin like 
this: “Production and sales of automobiles were higher last month due to a surge in 
consumer confidence, which drove consumers to showrooms in record numbers.” Sto-
ries like these highlight the role demand plays in determining aggregate output; they 
point to factors that affect demand, ranging from consumer confidence to interest rates.
■ 
But, surely, no amount of Indian consumers rushing to Indian showrooms can 
increase India’s output to the level of output in the United States. This suggests 
a second answer: What matters when it comes to aggregate output is the sup-
ply side—how much the economy can produce. How much can be produced de-
pends on how advanced the technology of the country is, how much capital it is 
using, and the size and the skills of its labor force. These factors—not consumer 
confidence—are the fundamental determinants of a country’s level of output.

Chapter 2 
A Tour of the Book 
33