Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, 
Poland, Portugal, the Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Swe-
den, Switzerland, Turkey, the United Kingdom, and the United 
States). Together, these countries account for about 70% of 
the world’s output. One strength of the OECD data is that, for 
many variables, the OECD tries to make the variables compa-
rable across member countries (or tells you when they are not 
comparable). The OECD puts out three useful publications, all 
available on the OECD site:

fiscal developments. All three publications are available on 
the IMF Web site (www.imf.org/external/index.htm).

Historical Statistics

■ For long-term historical statistics for the United States, the 
basic reference is Historical Statistics of the United States, 
Colonial Times to 1970, Parts 1 and 2, published by the U.S. 
Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census (www.
census.gov/prod/www/abs/statab.html).

■ For long-term historical statistics for several countries, a 
precious data source is Angus Maddison’s Monitoring the 
World Economy, 1820–1992, Development Centre Studies, 
OECD, Paris, 1995. This study gives data going back to 1820 
for 56 countries. Two even longer and broader sources are 
The World Economy: A Millenial Perspective, Development 
Studies, OECD, 2001, and The World Economy: Historical 
Statistics, Development Studies, OECD 2004, both also by 
Angus Maddison.

■ The first is the OECD Economic Outlook, published twice 
a year. In addition to describing current macroeconomic 
 issues and evolutions, it includes a data appendix, with 
data for many macroeconomic variables. The data typically 
go back to the 1980s and are reported consistently, both 
across time and across countries.

■ The second is the OECD Employment Outlook, published 
annually. It focuses more specifically on labor-market is-
sues and numbers.

■ Occasionally, the OECD puts together current and past 
data, and publishes a set of OECD Historical Statistics in 
which various years are grouped together.

Current Macroeconomic Issues

A number of Web sites offer information and commentaries 
about the macroeconomic issues of the day. In addition to The 
Economist Web site mentioned earlier, the site maintained by 
Nouriel Roubini (www.rgemonitor.com) offers an extensive set 
of links to articles and discussions on macroeconomic issues 
(by subscription).
Finally, if you still have not found what you were looking for, 
a site maintained by Bill Goffe at the State University of New York 
(SUNY) (www.rfe.org), lists not only many more data sources, but 
also sources for economic information in general, from working 
papers, to data, to jokes, to jobs in economics, and to blogs.

The main strength of the publications of the Interna-
tional Monetary Fund (IMF for short, located in Washing-
ton, D.C.) is that they cover nearly all of the countries of the 
world. The IMF has 187 member countries and provides data 
on each of them (www.imf.org).

■ A particularly useful IMF publication is the World Eco-
nomic Outlook (WEO for short), which is published twice 
a year and which describes major economic events in the 
world and in specific member countries. Selected series 
associated with the Outlook are available in the WEO da-
tabase, available on the IMF site (www.imf.org/external/
data.htm). Most of the data shown in this chapter come 
from this database.

Key Terms

Organization for Economic Cooperation and  
 Development (OECD), 17
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 18

■ Two other useful publications are the Global Financial Sta-
bility Report (GFSR for short), which focuses on financial 
developments, and the Fiscal Monitor, which focuses on

18 
Introduction 
The Core