2-1 Aggregate Output

Economists studying economic activity in the nineteenth century or during the Great 
 Depression had no measure of aggregate activity (aggregate is the word macroecono-
mists use for total) on which to rely. They had to put together bits and pieces of infor-
mation, such as the shipments of iron ore or sales at some department stores, to try to 
infer what was happening to the economy as a whole.
It was not until the end of World War II that national income and product accounts 
(or national income accounts, for short) were put together. Measures of aggregate out-
put have been published on a regular basis in the United States since October 1947. 
(You will find measures of aggregate output for earlier times, but these have been con-
structed retrospectively.)
Like any accounting system, the national income accounts first define concepts 
and then construct measures corresponding to these concepts. You need only to 
look at statistics from countries that have not yet developed such accounts to realize 
that precision and consistency in such accounts are crucial. Without precision and 
 consistency, numbers that should add up do not; trying to understand what is going 
on feels like trying to balance someone else’s checkbook. We shall not burden you with 
the details of national income accounting here. But because you will occasionally need 
to know the definition of a variable and how variables relate to each other, Appendix 
1 at the end of the book gives you the basic accounting framework used in the United 
States (and, with minor variations, in most other countries) today. You will find it use-
ful whenever you want to look at economic data on your own.

Two economists, Simon 
Kuznets, from Harvard Uni-
versity, and Richard Stone, 
from Cambridge University, 
were given the Nobel Prize 
for their contributions to the 
development of the national 
income and product ac-
counts—a  gigantic intellectual 
and  empirical achievement.



You may come across another 
term, gross national product, 
or GNP. There is a subtle differ-
ence between “domestic” and 
“national,” and thus between 
GDP and GNP. We examine the 
distinction in Chapter 18 and 
in Appendix 1 at the end of the 
book. For now, ignore it.

GDP: Production and Income

The measure of aggregate output in the national income accounts is called the gross 
domestic product, or GDP, for short. To understand how GDP is constructed, it is best 
to work with a simple example. Consider an economy composed of just two firms:



■ 
Firm 1 produces steel, employing workers and using machines to produce the 
steel. It sells the steel for $100 to Firm 2, which produces cars. Firm 1 pays its work-
ers $80, leaving $20 in profit to the firm.
■ 
Firm 2 buys the steel and uses it, together with workers and machines, to produce 
cars. Revenues from car sales are $200. Of the $200, $100 goes to pay for steel and 
$70 goes to workers in the firm, leaving $30 in profit to the firm.



In reality, not only workers 
and machines are required for 
steel production, but so are 
iron ore, electricity, and so on. 
We shall ignore these to keep 
the example simple.

We can summarize this information in a table:

Steel Company (Firm 1)
Car Company (Firm 2)

Revenues from sales
$100
Revenues from sales
$200

Expenses
  Wages
$80
  $80
Expenses
  Wages
  Steel purchases
 $70
$100

$170

Proﬁt
  $20
Proﬁt
  $30

An intermediate good is a 
good used in the production 
of another good. Some goods 
can be both final goods and 
intermediate goods. Potatoes 
sold directly to consumers are 
final goods. Potatoes used 
to produce potato chips are 
intermediate goods. Can you 
think of other examples?

How would you define aggregate output in this economy? As the sum of the values 
of all goods produced in the economy—the sum of $100 from the production of steel 
and $200 from the production of cars, so $300? Or as just the value of cars, which is 
equal to $200?
Some thought suggests that the right answer must be $200. Why? Because steel 
is an intermediate good: It is used in the production of cars. Once we count the



20 
Introduction 
The Core