Did Spain Have a 24% Unemployment  
Rate in 1994?

FOCUS

declaring it to the social security administration—accounted 
for between 10 and 15% of employment. But it was composed 
mostly of people who already had a job and were taking a sec-
ond or even a third job. The best estimate from the survey was 
that only about 15% of the unemployed were in fact working. 
This implied that the unemployment rate, which was officially 
21% at the time, was in fact closer to 18%, still a very high 
number. In short, the Spanish underground economy was sig-
nificant, but it just was not the case that most of the Spanish 
unemployed work in the underground economy.
How did the unemployed survive? Did they survive be-
cause unemployment benefits were unusually generous in 
Spain? No. Except for very generous unemployment ben-
efits in two regions, Andalusia and Extremadura—which, 
not surprisingly, had even higher unemployment than the 
rest of the country—unemployment benefits were roughly 
in line with unemployment benefits in other OECD coun-
tries. Benefits were typically 70% of the wage for the first six 
months, and 60% thereafter. They were given for a period of 
4 to 24 months, depending on how long people had worked 
before becoming unemployed. The 30% of the unemployed 
who had been unemployed for more than two years did not 
receive unemployment benefits.
So how did they survive? A key to the answer lies with 
the Spanish family structure. The unemployment rate was 
highest among the young: In 1994, it was close to 50% for 
those between 16 and 19, and around 40% for those be-
tween 20 and 24. The young typically stay at home until 
their late 20s, and have increasingly done so as unemploy-
ment increased. Looking at households rather than at 
individuals, the proportion of households where nobody 
was employed was less than 10% in 1994; the proportion 
of households that received neither wage income nor un-
employment benefits was around 3%. In short, the family 
structure, and transfers from the rest of the family, were the 
factors that allowed many of the unemployed to survive.

In 1994, the official unemployment rate in Spain reached 
24%. (It then decreased steadily, reaching a low of 8% in 
2007, only to increase dramatically again since the begin-
ning of the crisis. It now exceeds 20% and is still increasing. 
Thus, many of the issues in this Focus box are becoming 
relevant again.) This was roughly the same unemployment 
rate as in the United States in 1933, the worst year of the 
Great Depression. Yet Spain in 1994 looked nothing like the 
United States in 1933: There were few homeless, and most 
cities looked prosperous. Can we really believe that nearly 
one–fifth of the Spanish labor force was looking for work?
To answer this question, we must first examine how the 
Spanish unemployment number is put together. Like the 
CPS in the United States, unemployment is measured using 
a large survey of 60,000 households. People are classified as 
unemployed if they indicate that they are not working but 
are seeking work.
Can we be sure that people tell the truth? No.  Although 
there is no obvious incentive to lie—answers to the survey 
are confidential and are not used to determine whether 
people are eligible for unemployment benefits—those 
who are working in the underground economy may prefer 
to play it safe and report that they are unemployed instead.
The size of the underground economy—the part of eco-
nomic activity that is not measured in official statistics, either 
because the activity is illegal or because firms and workers 
would rather not report it and thus not pay taxes—is an old 
issue in Spain. And because of that, we actually know more 
about the underground economy in Spain than in many other 
countries: In 1985, the Spanish government tried to find out 
more and organized a detailed survey of 60,000 individuals. 
To try to elicit the truth from those interviewed, the question-
naire asked interviewees for an extremely precise account of 
the use of their time, making it more difficult to misreport. 
The answers were interesting. The underground economy 
in Spain—defined as the number of people working without

Second, economists also care about the unemployment rate because it provides 
a signal that the economy may not be using some of its resources efficiently. Many 
workers who want to work do not find jobs; the economy is not utilizing its human 
resources efficiently. From this viewpoint, can very low unemployment also be a prob-
lem? The answer is yes. Like an engine running at too high a speed, an economy in 
which unemployment is very low may be overutilizing its resources and run into labor 
shortages. How low is “too low”? This is a difficult question, a question we will take up 
at more length later in the book. The question came up in 2000 in the United States. At 
the end of 2000, some economists worried that the unemployment rate, 4% at the time, 
was indeed too low. So, while they did not advocate triggering a recession, they favored 
lower (but positive) output growth for some time, so as to allow the unemployment 
rate to increase to a somewhat higher level. It turned out that they got more than they 
had asked for: a recession rather than a slowdown.

It is probably because of 
statements like this that eco-
nomics is known as the “dis-
mal science.”



28 
Introduction 
The Core