Figure 2-7

Introduction
A tour of the world (Chapter 1)
A tour of the book (Chapter 2)

The organization  
of the book

The Core

Extension
The short run (IS-LM)
Chapters 3 to 5

Extension

Expectations
Chapters
14 to 17

The open economy
Chapters 18 to 21

The medium run (AS-AD)
Chapters 6 to 9

The long run
Chapters 10 to 13

Back to policy
Chapters 22 to 24

Epilogue
Chapter 25

■ 
Chapters 6 to 9 develop the supply side and look at how output is determined in 
the medium run. Chapter 6 introduces the labor market. Chapter 7 puts together 
goods, financial, and labor markets and shows you how to think about the deter-
mination of output both in the short run and in the medium run. The resulting 
framework is called the aggregate supply–aggregate demand AS–AD model and, 
together with the IS–LM, is another workhorse of macroeconomics. Chapter 8 
 focuses on the relation between unemployment, inflation, and money growth. By 
then, you will have all the elements we need to take a first detailed look at the crisis. 
The crisis is unusual in a number of ways. The initial shock is a major shock to the 
financial system. Both monetary and fiscal policies are facing sharp constraints. As 
a result, the crisis is much deeper than a standard recession, and the recovery is 
proving to be very slow. This is the subject of Chapter 9.
■ 
Chapters 10 to 13 focus on the long run. Chapter 10 introduces the relevant facts 
by looking at the growth of output both across countries and over long periods of 
time. Chapters 11 and 12 discuss how both capital accumulation and technologi-
cal progress determine growth. Chapter 13 looks at the interaction among techno-
logical progress, wages, and unemployment.

Extensions

The core chapters give you a way of thinking about how output (and unemployment, 
and inflation) is determined over the short, medium, and long run. However, they 
leave out several elements, which are explored in two extensions:

■ 
Expectations play an essential role in macroeconomics. Nearly all the economic 
decisions people and firms make—whether or not to buy a car, whether to buy 
bonds or to buy stocks, whether or not to build a new plant—depend on their 
expectations about future income, future profits, future interest rates, and so on. 
Fiscal and monetary policy affect economic activity not only through their direct 
effects, but also through their effects on people’s and firms’ expectations. While we 
touch on these issues in the core, Chapters 14 to 17 offer a more detailed treatment 
and draw the implications for fiscal and monetary policy.

Chapter 2 
A Tour of the Book 
35