Key Terms

European Union (EU), 9
euro area, 10
common currency area, 10

Questions and Problems

QUICK CHECK
All Quick Check questions and problems are available 
on MyEconLab.
1. Using the information in this chapter, label each of the fol-
lowing statements true, false, or uncertain. Explain briefly.
 a. Output growth was negative in both advanced as well as 
emerging and developing countries in 2009. 
 b. Stock prices fell between 2007 and 2010 around the world. 
 c. In the 1960s and early 1970s, the United States had a 
higher rate of unemployment than Europe, but today it 
has a much lower rate of unemployment.
 d. China’s seemingly high growth rate is a myth, a product 
solely of misleading official statistics.
 e. The high rate of unemployment in Europe started when a 
group of major European countries adopted a common 
currency.
 f. The Federal Reserve lowers interest rates when it wants to 
avoid recession and raises interest rates when it wants to 
slow the rate of growth in the economy.
 g. Output per person is very different in the euro area, the 
United States, and China. 
 h. The United States federal government has never run a 
budget surplus in the last two decades.

b. When China catches up with the United States in total 
 output, will residents of China have the same standard of 
living as U.S. residents? Explain.
 c. Another word for standard of living is output per person. 
How has China raised its output per person in the last 
two decades? Are these methods applicable to the United 
States? 
 d. Do you think China’s experience in raising its standard of 
living (output per person) provides a model for developing 
countries to follow?

4. Deficit reduction was identified as the major issue facing the 
United States as of the writing of this chapter. 
 a. Go to the most recent Economic Report of the President 
to ascertain whether deficits as a percent of GDP have in-
creased or decreased compared to what was expected for 
2011 and 2012 as of the writing of the chapter.
 b. Calculate the total change in the deficit as a percent of 
GDP between 2011 and most recent data. Now split the 
change in the deficit since 2011 into (1) the changes in tax 
revenue as a percent of GDP, (2) the change in expendi-
tures as a percent of GDP. 
 c. Use the data entitled Economic and Financial Indicators 
found in The Economist to find the country with largest 
budget deficit and largest budget surplus. In this list the 
budget deficit is called the “Budget Balance.” Then find the 
OECD member in this list with the largest budget deficit 
and largest budget surplus.

2. Macroeconomic policy in Europe
Beware of simplistic answers to complicated macroeco-
nomic questions. Consider each of the following statements and 
comment on whether there is another side to the story.
 a. There is a simple solution to the problem of high European 
unemployment: Reduce labor market rigidities.
 b. What can be wrong about joining forces and adopt-
ing a common currency? The euro is obviously good for 
Europe.

EXPLORE FURTHER
5. U.S. postwar recessions
This question looks at the recessions over the past 40 years. 
To work this problem, first obtain quarterly data on U.S. output 
growth for the period 1960 to the most recent date from the 
Web site www.bea.gov. Table 1.1.1 presents the percent change 
in real gross domestic product. This data can be downloaded 
to a spreadsheet. Plot the quarterly GDP growth rates from 
1960:1 to the latest observations. Did any quarters have nega-
tive growth? Using the definition of a recession as two or more 
consecutive quarters of negative growth, answer the following 
questions.
 a. How many recessions has the U.S. economy undergone 
since 1960, quarter 2?
 b. How many quarters has each recession lasted?
 c. In terms of length and magnitude, which two recessions 
have been the most severe?
6. From Problem 5, write down the quarters in which the six 
traditional recessions started. Find the monthly series in the 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (FRED) database for the 
seasonally adjusted unemployment rate. Retrieve the monthly

DIG DEEPER
All Dig Deeper questions and problems are available 
on MyEconLab.
3. Chinese economic growth is the outstanding feature of the 
world economic scene over the past two decades. 
 a. In 2010, U.S. output was $14.7 trillion, and Chinese out-
put was $5.8 trillion. Suppose that from now on, the out-
put of China grows at an annual rate of 10.5% per year, 
while the output of the United States grows at an annual 
rate of 2.6% per year. These are the values in each coun-
try for the period 2000–2007 as stated in the text. Using 
these assumptions and a spreadsheet, calculate and 
plot U.S. and Chinese output from 2010 over the next 
100 years. How many years will it take for China to have 
a total level of output equal to that of the United States?

16 
Introduction 
The Core