for most of the decade led to strong growth of government revenues. Second, rules 
were devised and implemented to contain government spending, from the use of 
spending caps on some categories of spending to the requirement that any new 
spending program be associated with an equal increase in revenues. Once budget 
surpluses appeared, however, Congress became increasingly willing to break its 
own rules and allow for more spending. At the same time, the Bush administra-
tion convinced Congress to cut taxes, with the stated intent of spurring growth. The 
result was a return to budget deficits. On the eve of the crisis, in 2007, the deficit 
was equal to 1.7% of GDP, not very large but still a deficit. The crisis had a dramatic 
effect on the deficit, which increased to 9% of GDP in 2010 and appears likely to be 
even higher in 2011. The factors behind the increase are straightforward. Lower 
output has led to lower government revenues. Federal revenues, which were equal 
to 18.9% of GDP in 2007, had declined to 16.2% of GDP in 2010. Federal spending, 
which was equal to 20.6% in 2007, had increased to 25.3% in 2010. This reflects not 
only an increase in transfers, such as higher unemployment benefits, but a more 
general increase in spending across the board as the government tried to counter-
act the decrease in private demand through an increase in public spending.
You may conclude that, as output recovers further and unemployment de-
creases, revenues will increase and some of the spending will be phased out. This is 
indeed likely to be the case, and forecasts are for a reduction in the deficit to around 
5% by the middle of the decade. A 5% deficit, however, is still too a large number 
and creates a steadily increasing debt. Budget forecasts for the more distant future 
are even gloomier. The U.S. population is getting older, and Social Security benefits 
will increase substantially in the future. And, even more importantly, health expen-
ditures are growing very fast and, with them, spending in government programs 
such as Medicare and Medicaid. So there is wide agreement that the budget deficit 
must be reduced further. But there is disagreement as to both when and how.

■ 
Some economists argue that deficit reduction should start now and proceed rapidly. 
They argue that the credibility of the U.S. government is at stake, and that only a strong 
reduction will convince people that the government will do what is needed to stabi-
lize the debt. Other economists argue, however, that too fast a reduction in the deficit 
would be dangerous. A reduction in the deficit can be achieved by a combination of 
an increase in taxes and a decrease in spending. Either one, they argue, will decrease 
demand and slow down growth at a time when unemployment is still very high. Their 
recommendation is thus to reduce the deficit, but to do it slowly and steadily.
■ 
Even if there is agreement on the need for deficit reduction, there is much less 
agreement on how it should be achieved. The disagreement is along political lines. 
Republicans believe that it should be done primarily through decreases in spend-
ing. They suggest the elimination of a number of government programs and caps 
on such programs as Medicare. Democrats believe that most existing programs are 
justified, and they are more inclined to want to do the adjustment through an in-
crease in taxes. The worry, at this juncture, is that these positions are hard to rec-
oncile, and that, as a result, large deficits may continue for a long time to come.

1-3 The Euro Area

In 1957, six European countries decided to form a common European market—an eco-
nomic zone where people and goods could move freely. Since then, 21 more countries 
have joined, bringing the total to 27. This group is now known as the European Union, 
or EU for short.

Until a few years ago, the  official 
name was the European Com-
munity, or EC. You may still en-
counter that name.


Chapter 1 
A Tour of the World 
9