■ 
The core chapters treat the economy as closed, ignoring its interactions with the 
rest of the world. But the fact is, economies are increasingly open, trading goods 
and services and financial assets with one another. As a result, countries are be-
coming more and more interdependent. The nature of this interdependence and 
the implications for fiscal and monetary policy are the topics of Chapters 18 to 21.

Back to Policy

Monetary policy and fiscal policy are discussed in nearly every chapter of this book. 
But once the core and the extensions have been covered, it is useful to go back and put 
things together in order to assess the role of policy.

■ 
Chapter 22 focuses on general issues of policy, whether macroeconomists really 
know enough about how the economy works to use policy as a stabilization tool at 
all, and whether policy makers can be trusted to do what is right.
■ 
Chapters 23 and 24 return to the role of fiscal and monetary policy.

Epilogue

Macroeconomics is not a fixed body of knowledge. It evolves over time. The final chapter, 
Chapter 25, looks at the history of macroeconomics and how macroeconomists have come 
to believe what they believe today. From the outside, macroeconomics sometimes looks 
like a field divided among schools—“Keynesians,” “monetarists,” “new classicals,” “supply-
siders,” and so on—hurling arguments at each other. The actual process of research is more 
orderly and more productive than this image suggests. We identify what we see as the main 
differences among macroeconomists, the set of propositions that define the core of 
macroeconomics today, and the challenges posed to macroeconomists by the crisis.

Summary

■ We can think of GDP, the measure of aggregate output, 
in three equivalent ways: (1) GDP is the value of the fi-
nal goods and services produced in the economy during 
a given period; (2) GDP is the sum of value added in the 
economy during a given period; and (3) GDP is the sum of 
incomes in the economy during a given period.

increases. Macroeconomists look at two measures of the 
price level. The first is the GDP deflator, which is the av-
erage price of the goods produced in the economy. The 
second is the Consumer Price Index (CPI), which is the av-
erage price of goods consumed in the economy.

■ Inflation leads to changes in income distribution, to distor-
tions, and to increased uncertainty.

■ Nominal GDP is the sum of the quantities of final goods 
produced times their current prices. This implies that 
changes in nominal GDP reflect both changes in quanti-
ties and changes in prices. Real GDP is a measure of output. 
Changes in real GDP reflect changes in quantities only.

■ There are two important relations among output, unem-
ployment, and inflation. The first, called Okun’s law, is a 
relation between output growth and the change in unem-
ployment: High output growth typically leads to a decrease 
in the unemployment rate. The second, called the Phillips 
curve, is a relation between unemployment and inflation: 
A low unemployment rate typically leads to an increase in 
the inflation rate.

■ A person is classified as unemployed if he or she does not 
have a job and is looking for one. The unemployment rate 
is the ratio of the number of people unemployed to the 
number of people in the labor force. The labor force is 
the  sum of those employed and those unemployed.

■ Macroeconomists distinguish between the short run (a few 
years), the medium run (a decade), and the long run (a few 
decades or more). They think of output as being determined 
by demand in the short run. They think of output as being 
determined by the level of technology, the capital stock, and 
the labor force in the medium run. Finally, they think of out-
put as being determined by factors like education, research, 
saving, and the quality of government in the long run.

■ Economists care about unemployment because of the hu-
man cost it represents. They also look at unemployment 
because it sends a signal about how efficiently the economy 
is using its resources. High unemployment indicates that 
the country is not utilizing its resources efficiently.

■ Inflation is a rise in the general level of prices—the price 
level. The inflation rate is the rate at which the price level

36 
Introduction 
The Core