Take, for example, the workers’ real wage—the wage measured in terms of goods 
rather than in dollars. In an economy with 10% more inflation, prices would increase 
by 10% more a year. But wages would also increase by 10% more a year, so real wages 
would be unaffected by inflation. Inflation would not be entirely irrelevant; people 
would have to keep track of the increase in prices and wages when making decisions. 
But this would be a small burden, hardly justifying making control of the inflation rate 
one of the major goals of macroeconomic policy.
So why do economists care about inflation? Precisely because there is no such 
thing as pure inflation:

■ 
During periods of inflation, not all prices and wages rise proportionately. Because they 
don’t, inflation affects income distribution. For example, retirees in many countries re-
ceive payments that do not keep up with the price level, so they lose in relation to other 
groups when inflation is high. This is not the case in the United States, where Social 
Security benefits automatically rise with the CPI, protecting retirees from inflation. But 
during the very high inflation that took place in Russia in the 1990s, retirement pen-
sions did not keep up with inflation, and many retirees were pushed to near starvation.
■ 
Inflation leads to other distortions. Variations in relative prices also lead to more 
uncertainty, making it harder for firms to make decisions about the future, such 
as investment decisions. Some prices, which are fixed by law or by regulation, lag 
behind the others, leading to changes in relative prices. Taxation interacts with 
inflation to create more distortions. If tax brackets are not adjusted for inflation, 
for example, people move into higher and higher tax brackets as their nominal in-
come increases, even if their real income remains the same.

This is known as bracket creep. 
In the United States, the tax 
brackets are adjusted automat-
ically for inflation: If inflation is 
5%, all tax brackets also go up 
by 5%—in other words, there is 
no bracket creep.


If inflation is so bad, does this imply that deflation (negative inflation) is good?
The answer is no. First, high deflation (a large negative rate of inflation) would create 
many of the same problems as high inflation, from distortions to increased uncertainty. Sec-
ond, as we shall see later in the book, even a low rate of deflation limits the ability of monetary 
policy to affect output. So what is the “best” rate of inflation? Most macroeconomists believe 
that the best rate of inflation is a low and stable rate of inflation, somewhere between 1 and 
4%. We shall look at the pros and cons of different rates of inflation later in the book.

Newspapers sometimes con-
fuse deflation and recession. 
They may happen together but 
they are not the same. Deflation 
is a decrease in the price level. 
A recession is a decrease in 
real output.



2-4 Output, Unemployment, and the Inflation 
Rate: Okun’s Law and the Phillips Curve

We have looked separately at the three main dimensions of aggregate economic activ-
ity: output growth, the unemployment rate, and the inflation rate. Clearly they are not 
independent, and much of this book will be spent looking at the relations among them 
in detail. But it is useful to have a first look now.

Okun’s Law

Intuition suggests that if output growth is high, unemployment will decrease, and this is 
indeed true. This relation was first examined by American economist Arthur Okun and 
for this reason has become known as Okun’s law. Figure 2-5 plots the change in the un-
employment rate on the vertical axis against the rate of growth of output on the horizon-
tal axis for the United States since 1960. It also draws the line that best fits the cloud of 
points in the figure. Looking at the figure and the line suggests two conclusions:



Arthur Okun was an adviser 
to President Kennedy in 
the 1960s. Okun’s law is, of 
course, not a law, but an em-
pirical regularity.

■ 
The line is downward sloping and fits the cloud of points quite well. Put in eco-
nomic terms: There is a tight relation between the two variables: Higher output

Chapter 2 
A Tour of the Book 
31