Real GDP, Technological Progress, and  
the Price of Computers

FOCUS

new computers this year have a speed of 3 GHz compared 
to a speed of 2 GHz for new computers last year. And sup-
pose the dollar price of new computers this year is the 
same as the dollar price of new computers last year. Then 
economists in charge of computing the adjusted price of 
computers will conclude that new computers are in fact 
10% cheaper than last year.
This approach, which treats goods as providing a col-
lection of characteristics—for computers, speed, mem-
ory, and so on—each with an implicit price, is called 
hedonic pricing (“hedone” means “pleasure” in Greek). 
It is used by the Department of Commerce—which con-
structs real GDP—to estimate changes in the price of 
complex and fast changing goods, such as automobiles 
and computers. Using this approach, the Department of 
Commerce estimates that, for a given price, the quality of 
new computers has increased on average by 18% a year 
since 1981. Put another way, a typical personal computer 
in 2010 delivers 1.1829  121 times the computing serv-
ices a typical personal computer delivered in 1981.
Not only do computers deliver more services, they have 
become cheaper as well: Their dollar price has declined by 
about 10% a year since 1981. Putting this together with the 
information in the previous paragraph, this implies that 
their quality–adjusted price has fallen at an average rate 
of 18%  10%  28% per year. Put another way, a dol-
lar spent on a computer today buys 1.2829  1,285 times 
more computing services than a dollar spent on a computer 
in 1981.

A tough problem in computing real GDP is how to deal with 
changes in quality of existing goods. One of the most dif-
ficult cases is computers. It would clearly be absurd to as-
sume that a personal computer in 2010 is the same good as 
a personal computer produced in 1981 (the year in which 
the IBM PC was introduced): The same amount of money 
can clearly buy much more computing in 2010 than it could 
in 1981. But how much more? Does a 2010 computer pro-
vide 10 times, 100 times, or 1,000 times the computing serv-
ices of a 1981 computer? How should we take into account 
the improvements in internal speed, the size of the random 
access memory (RAM) or of the hard disk, the fact that com-
puters can access the Internet, and so on?
The approach used by economists to adjust for these 
improvements is to look at the market for computers and 
how it values computers with different characteristics in 
a given year. Example: Suppose the evidence from prices 
of different models on the market shows that people are 
willing to pay 10% more for a computer with a speed of 3 
GHz (3,000 megahertz) rather than 2 GHz. (The first edi-
tion of this book, published in 1996, compared two com-
puters, with speeds of 50 and 16 megaherz, respectively. 
This change is a good indication of technological progress. 
A further indication of technological progress is that, for 
the past few years, progress has not been made by increas-
ing the speed of processors, but rather by using multicore 
processors. We shall leave this aspect aside here, but peo-
ple in charge of national income accounts cannot; they 
have to take this change into account as well.) Suppose

is no official definition of what constitutes a recession, but the convention is to refer to 
a “recession” if the economy goes through at least two consecutive quarters of negative 
growth. Although GDP growth was positive for 2001 as a whole, it was negative during 
each of the first three quarters of 2001; thus 2001 qualifies as a (mild) recession.

2-2 The Unemployment Rate

Because it is a measure of aggregate activity, GDP is obviously the most important 
macroeconomic variable. But two other variables, unemployment and inflation, tell us 
about other important aspects of how an economy is performing. This section focuses 
on the unemployment rate.
We start with two definitions: Employment is the number of people who have a 
job. Unemployment is the number of people who do not have a job but are looking for 
one. The labor force is the sum of employment and unemployment:

L          =             N       +            U
 labor force = employment + unemployment

Chapter 2 
A Tour of the Book 
25